---
title: "Defeat Trump, stop Project 2025"
layout: post
tags:
- Joe Biden
---

Defeat Trump, stop Project 2025, and continue our progress for the American people.

Folks --- we must hold Trump to account for Project 2025. But first, let me cut to the chase.

This race is about you and your family. It's about your freedom. And it's about our democracy.

We stand for the proposition that all people are created equal --- and I'll be damned if I let Donald Trump walk this nation away from it.

\[...\]

You may have noticed that since the debate the press has been hammering me --- and the focus has shifted from Donald Trump.

Well, it's time to shift the focus back to Donald Trump.

Donald Trump is a convicted criminal. Donald Trump was found liable for sexual assault. Donald Trump is a business fraud.

Just look at Project 2025, the blueprint for a second Trump term. It's the biggest attack on our government and our personal freedom ever proposed in this country:

- It will ban abortion nationwide.
- It will cut Social Security and Medicare.
- It will abolish the Department of Education.
- It will eliminate protections for people with pre-existing conditions.
- It will give a massive tax cut to the very wealthy.
- It will allow companies to stop paying overtime to many workers.
- It will round up 10 million people in detention camps.

Folks, this is not a game. Project 2025 is serious.

America needs to wake up and realize what Trump and the MAGA Republicans are trying to do. Project 2025 is what they'll do. And it will fundamentally change your life.

Source: Joe Biden, email
