---
title: "Harris believes Trump is a 'fascist'"
layout: post
tags:
- Kamala Harris
---

Anderson Cooper:
: I want to start by asking you, though. For weeks you have been calling Donald Trump unstable. Unhinged. You've call him dangerous. You've quoted General Milley recently who called him a fascist. Today you quoted General Kelly who said that Trump repeatedly praise Hitler. But there are tens of millions of Americans right now who have heard all those things, and they don't buy it, or even if they do, they're still going to vote for Donald Trump. He's arguably more popular now than ever. You have 13 days to go. What do you say to those voters to convince them? Because some of them are in this room? 

Kamala Harris:
: Sure. And I thank you all for taking the time to be here. And you could be doing a number of other things with your time. So this really is proof that we love our country. People are engaged, Anderson, and really want to talk about the issues. And so the issue that you raise, yes, I do believe that Donald Trump is unstable, increasing, unstable and unfit to serve. And I don't necessarily think that everyone has heard what you and I have heard repeatedly, which is the people who know Donald Trump best, the people who worked with him in the white House, in the Situation Room, in the Oval Office, all Republicans, by the way, who served in his administration, his former chief of staff, his national security adviser, former secretary of defense and his vice president have all called him unfit and dangerous. They have said explicitly he has contempt for the Constitution of the United States. They have said he should never again serve as president of the United States. We know that is why Mike pence is not running with him again, why the job was empty. And then today we learned that John Kelly, a four star marine general who is his longest serving chief of staff, gave an interview recently. In the last two weeks of this election talking about how dangerous Donald Trump is. And I think one has to think about, why would someone who served with him, who is not political, a four star marine general, why is he telling the American people now? And frankly, I think of it as is. He's just putting out a 901 call to the American people, understand what could happen if Donald Trump were back in the white House. And this time we must take very seriously those folks who knew him best and who were career people are not going to be there to hold him back. At least before there were folks who we know what he would say, but they would restrain him. Imagine now Donald Trump in the Oval Office, in the Situation Room. He who has openly admired dictators said he would be a dictator on day one. The former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has said he is a fascist to the core. So I think that when the American people reflect, especially those who are undecided on who you should listen to, don't take my word for it. In fact, go online and listen to John Kelly, his voice, talking about what he thinks of Donald Trump two weeks before the election. Because I think we all know to your point, Anderson, it is close, but there are undecided voters who clearly, by being here, have an open mind, want to talk in a way that is about grounded in issues, in fact. And when they hear these facts, I think it compels a lot of people to be concerned about the future of our country with Donald Trump at the lead. 

Anderson Cooper
: You've quoted General Milley calling Donald Trump a fascist. You yourself have not used that word to describe him. Let me ask you tonight, do you think Donald Trump is a fascist? 

Kamala Harris
: Yes, I do, yes, I do. And I and I also believe that the people who know him best on this subject should be trusted. Again, look at their careers. These are not people with the exception. I think of only Mike pence. These were not politicians. These are career people who have served in the highest roles in national security, who have served as generals in our military, who are highly respected. Talking about the person who would be commander in chief, not to mention what we know and what they've told us about how he talks about the military servicemen and women, referring to them as suckers and losers, how he he demeans people who have taken an oath to sacrifice their life for our country. And I do believe, Anderson, that part of this is why, even just this week, I traveled this state and others with Liz Cheney, former Congress member who was very high ranking Republican. She has endorsed me, her father, the former vice president, United States Dick Cheney, is voting for me. Over 400 members of previous members of the administration --- from Ronald Reagan to both Presidents Bush to Donald Trump, even --- have endorsed my candidacy. And the reason why, among them is a legitimate fear, based on Donald Trump's words and actions, that he will not obey an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States. He himself has said he would terminate the Constitution of the United States and wants to earn your vote to stand again behind the seal of the president of the United States. No one standing behind the seal of the president of the United States of America should be in that position, saying they want to terminate the Constitution of the United States.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AifTTFSQfqw?si=uF5Loz7nBl2gsai4" title="Harris believes Trump is a fascist" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Source: CNN, youtu.be/AifTTFSQfqw?si=rpoZpiQFyGSol23-
