---
title: "Remove and prosecute tRump"
layout: post
tags:
- Kevin Miller
---

**Demand The Removal And Prosecution Of tRump And Those Enabling Him To Save Our Democracy**

I, along with many others, find myself increasingly concerned about the political developments in our country. I have observed with growing alarm the actions of Donald Trump, JD Vance, certain Republican Congress members, and Republican SCOTUS members, whom I believe are enabling a coup (and uses the constitution against us with blessings from Congress and SCOTUS) attempt led by Trump to take over our government. It is a matter of great personal distress and national urgency.

The legitimacy of democracy depends on the covenant of trust between elected leaders and the nation's citizens. When that trust is violated, democracy hangs in the balance. Alleged misinformation, unsubstantiated claims, and attempts to undermine the government is not what we expect from our leaders.

As per a study by the Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) project, the U.S. is experiencing significant 'democratic backsliding.' The study also states that the U.S. scored a concerning 3.3 out of 10 for 'liberal democracy' last year— the lowest score in decades (V-Dem, 2021).

We need to ensure we are led by individuals who respect the ideals of our democracy, prioritize the national interest and the will of the people over partisan outlooks. The future of our great nation depends on it. I call upon my fellow citizens to demand that Donald Trump, JD Vance, those GOP Congress and SCOTUS members who support Trump’s coup be removed from office and replaced immediately to preserve the foundations of our democracy. Please, sign this petition, act now, and let our collective voices be heard.

Source: Kevin Miller, change.org/p/demand-the-removal-and-prosecution-of-trump-and-those-enabling-him-to-save-our-democracy
